---
title: 'Bose QuietComfort 35 vs. Sennheiser PXC-550 Wireless Noise Cancelling Headphones'
date: "2018-06-17T18:00:00-05:00"
url: "/blog/bose-quietcomfort-35-sennheiser-pxc550-wireless-noise-cancelling-headphones"
categories:
- Music
- Headphones
- Gear
description: "Which is better: the Bose or Sennheiser noise-cancelling headphones?"
image: "/media/2018/06/sennheiser-bose-headphones.jpg"
thumbnail: /media/2018/06/sennheiser-bose-headphones.tn-500x500.jpg
---

I bought pairs of [Bose QuietComfort 35 Series II]({{< amz B0756CYWWD >}}) and
[Sennheiser PXC-550]({{< amz B01E3XLNA0 >}}) wireless noise cancelling
headphones, and compared their performance. Both are good headphones, but the
Bose is the clear winner in nearly every category.  The Bose headphones offer
significantly better comfort, ease of use, sound quality, and noise cancelling.
And both are priced at $350, so the choice is easy.

<!--more-->

I've actually owned the Sennheisers for quite a while, so I'm very familiar with
them. (I've been a Sennheiser fan and have owned many pairs of Sennheisers, as
you'll find if you search this website). I also used to own a pair of an older
generation of Bose noise cancelling headphones, so I bought their latest to give
it a thorough evaluation and side-by-side comparison.

![Bose and Sennheiser headphones](/media/2018/06/sennheiser-bose-headphones.jpg)

I listened to these headphones several hours daily for a week, including on
cross-country flights. I evaluated them extensively in many different
environments, with and without music, and with many combinations of settings.

Both headphones offer substantially similar features: Bluetooth connection,
built-in microphones, music controls, and more. In the following sections I will
summarize my opinion of them.

### Noise Cancelling

The Bose noise cancelling is noticeably better than the Sennheiser. In a busy
airport terminal, with a television blaring overhead, the Bose cut out the
television completely and almost completely silenced the terminal announcements.
Voices of people speaking around me were nearly inaudible. The Sennheiser
eliminated a lot of background murmur, but I could still hear and understand the
television.

On the plane, the preflight announcements were nearly inaudible, and completely
unintelligible, with the Bose. The same is not true of the Sennheiser. The Bose
eliminated the noise of the jet engines and rushing air; the Sennheiser simply
reduced it.

During takeoff and landing, the Bose handled the buffetting and bumping without
trouble. The Sennheiser punished my eardrums with low-frequency compressions,
and I have learned to turn off noise cancelling during takeoff and landing.

The Sennheiser also react to air blowing from the overhead vent, producing
noises in response. The Bose stays silent, even when I deliberately aimed the
air vent on them and rotated my head to catch the stream of air at different
angles.

I remembered my previous pair of Bose as having strong "eardrum suck" when
turning on the noise cancelling. It's a sensation like diving underwater, and I
find it mildly uncomfortable. The new Bose have almost none of that; the
Sennheiser have more of it than the Bose do. My previous Bose headphones also
had a way of letting sound leak in when I moved my head or jaw; the new
generation doesn't have that problem.

In summary, the Bose's noise cancellation is dramatically better than the
Sennheiser, resulting in near-total silence that reduces stress and allows music
to come through clearly---which is my next topic.

### Sound Quality

I performed extensive subjective listening tests. The Bose delivers obviously
superior sound quality to the Sennheiser. I believe it is mostly because of their
signal processing, not fully due to the physical characteristics of the speakers
or cups.

My first impression of the Bose, not comparing to anything but just listening,
was "this music is enhanced digitally to sound better, and is *slightly*
bass-heavy." I followed up that first impression by listening to a variety of
music on both headphones in many different environments, with and without noise
cancelling, and even with a physical cable and Bluetooth turned off.

First, in a noisy listening environment like an airplane, the Bose is much
better-sounding because it nearly eliminates that noise, letting the music shine
through. That aside, though, its audio quality is still much better than the
Sennheiser.

I continued listening in the plane with noise cancellation enabled at max.

The biggest difference beyond the noise cancelling is the treatment of the
midrange. The Sennheiser seems to have some midrange and upper-midrange
resonances in the physical earcups, which causes a lot of problems for vocals
and vocal-like instruments. Listening to *Sleepless* by Jann Arden, the
Sennheiser made her sound congested, like she was suffering from allergies. This
effect is not subtle: the upper midrange (perhaps 400-800Hz) is harsh and
conflicted. After many careful listenings, my only complaint about the way Bose
renders Jann Arden's voice is that it might give her a faint hint of a lisp.
Both headphones handled the triangles and cymbals in the chorus quite well; I've
found these very complex passages to be highly revealing of audio compression
and processing algorithms.

In Eric Johnson's *Strategem*, the Bose reproduces Eric's guitar with fidelity.
His signature tones come through raw and soulful. The Sennheiser suffers from
the same resonance as before, but treats Chris Maresh's bass guitar more
respectfully, where the Bose makes the upper bass sound a little bit antiseptic.

In Muse's *Starlight*, both headphones crank out the bass and drums with
appropriate aggressiveness and crunch, but the Sennheiser again gives Matt
Bellamy clogged sinuses. This theme repeats again and again, across every type
of music, in every noise cancelling setting, in quiet and noisy environments,
with or without Bluetooth. The Sennheiser just doesn't do a great job at this
crucial frequency range.

On the bass end, there was a decent back-and-forth between the headphones.
Sometimes the Bose did a better job, sometimes the Sennheiser carried the
contest. My first impression of the Bose was that of slightly more muscular and
smooth bass, as I mentioned previously. The Bose extends the frequency response
a few notes lower, giving it more authority, though this isn't pronounced. At
times, this felt artificially enhanced, but at other times it was what the music
needed.  The Sennheiser, for example, lacked a bit of presence in the bass on
Live's *In The Distance*, where the Bose gave it a better treatment. And the
Sennheiser delivered the bass on that song a bit raggedly, with some catches and
glitches; I think this was due to the noise cancellation working against the
cabin noise.

Turning to Mark Knopfler's album *Sailing To Philadelphia*, on the title track,
the Bose renders that faint delicious rasp that forms the foundation of Mark
Knopfler's supple voice, but the Sennheiser missed it, making him sound like
less of a baritone altogether. The Bose was much more faithful in the upper
vocal registers, blending together the layered instruments and both Mark's and
James Taylor's guest vocals, harmonizing them well. The Sennheiser turned the
harmonies harsh, and handled Mark's guitar carelessly.

In Roseanne Cash's *Tell Heaven*, the mix is heavy on thumping acoustic guitar,
bass, and drums. There's some mud in the mix itself, but the Bose reproduces it
as less of a peg-legged race on a wooden deck. On the other hand, the Bose adds
a subtle veiling effect to Roseanne's voice on this song, as though she were not
in the room, but singing through a door with a hanging cloth. Perhaps I was only
able to hear this because the Bose reduced the cabin noise so close to silence;
in any case, the Sennheiser again turned the vocals nasal and cloudy.

Patrick Ball's harp recordings are a great test of realism because there's zero
processing of the extraordinarily complex sonic signature of the brass-strung
harp with its long sustained notes, subtle fingerings, and damping.  The Bose
did a great job on *Passing Thus Alone*, rendering the low notes cleanly and the
sweet woody midrange and bell-like high end with clarity. The Sennheiser again
gives a harsh, nasal rendition, and fails to bring out the tonality of the low
bass strings.

Having listened through a coast-to-coast flight, I hopped off the plane and
spent an evening at my hotel in relative silence, where I connected the
headphones to my laptop via Bluetooth and wire. I tried all the noise cancelling
settings: high, low, and off. And I tried turning off the headphones and using
them in passive mode, too.

In the silence of a quiet room, I immediately noticed that simply putting the
headphones on my head, turned off and with no music playing, was different. The
Sennheiser are little echo chambers, like holding a seashell to your ear
to hear the "ocean." My breathing echoed noisily back from the cups. In
contrast, the Bose sealed the outside off.

With noise cancelling off, I listened to Renato Braz and the Paul Winter
Consort's recording of *Anabela*. The Bose is vastly superior: Paul Winter's
soprano sax is sweet and liquid, natural-sounding. The Sennheiser turns the same
tones into a clashing puddle of resonances. Renato's voice itself comes through
clearly with the Bose, its steady frailty on full display, and the double bass's
woodiness is transparent and the soundstage is nearly palpable. The Sennheiser
adds a hazy note to the bass, giving it a cool and distant sheen and sapping
some of its character. On the song *Feiti√ßo da Vila*, the bass becomes
challenging for both headphones, and I didn't like the rendition I got from
either one: muddy and boomy, though the Sennheiser did a more credible job on
this song's bass. (Back at home, my [ELAC](/blog/my-stereo-system/) speakers did
a better job with this track, and also revealed why the headphones struggled:
the bass is oddly percussive and subdued at the same time, a difficult
combination to reproduce.)

Next I disabled Bluetooth, turned the power off completely, and connected the
'phones via a cable to my MacBook Pro, and listened to *Dansons La Gigue* from
Patricia Barber's *Verse*. Turning off Bose's circuitry altogether helped
highlight that it, too, has a resonant peak in the midrange. Although it's not
as bad as the Sennheiser, it nonetheless made clear that my very first
impression was accurate: Bose is adding some sound processing even when the
noise cancellation is disabled. To be fair, it mostly works as intended: it
compensates for the acoustic characteristics of the headphones and delivers a
more natural sound.

But the Bose's sound is not fully transparent and neutral, and I think it goes
beyond merely equalizing the frequency response. I can't prove it, but I think
it's ever so slightly buffed and shined to make it glow a little and sound a
little sweeter. The cymbals in the Patricia Barber album got a tiny bit of lisp
again, as I noted when I was listening to Jann Arden. The "Josh Groban" effect,
if you will: probably designed to make listening more enjoyable for the average
person. I remember my old pair of Bose being pretty fatiguing after a few hours,
and it seems Bose has figured out how to make the sound a little more silky
without being tiring or obviously artificial.

### General Characteristics

- **Bluetooth Connectivity**. Both headphones offer Bluetooth connectivity. The
  Bose uses an AAC codec when connected to my MacBook, and I believe the same is
  true of my iPhone. The Sennheiser uses the SBC codec. The Bose uses a voice
  prompt to identify the device it's attached to: "Connected to Baron's iPhone";
  "Connected to Baron's MacBook." The Sennheiser calls all of my devices "Phone
  One" and "Phone Two" and I never know what it's actually connected to. Pairing
  is easy to initiate on the Bose. It's so confusing on the Sennheiser that I
  actually returned a set, believing it was defective. (It was refurbished and
  had previously been paired but not reset.) The Bose kept trying to connect to
  my laptop after I turned it off.
- **Controls**. The controls on the Bose are a few medium-sized physical buttons
  conveniently placed for thumbs to press. They are simple and effective. The
  Sennheiser has a touch-pad on the right earpad, along with a variety of small
  buttons. These are hard to use, with lots of magical combinations of touching,
  swiping, and long-touching that do way too many things for me to remember. It
  also has extra features that are anti-features: effect modes, etc. I sometimes
  accidentally activate these and it's annoying.
- **Calls**. I didn't use the Bose to make or receive calls. I've used the
  Sennheiser for that extensively and I've found that it can get into "call mode"
  with a low-quality mono audio codec. I haven't found a way to get it to revert
  to a music-quality audio codec except by performing a factory reset,
  which is very frustrating.
- **Battery**. Both headphones have long-lived built-in rechargeable batteries.
  The Bose narrates the battery level percentage when you turn it on. The
  Sennheiser doesn't and its battery level is harder to determine. When the
  Sennheiser runs moderately low on battery, it begins interrupting with a voice
  prompt at intervals, which is a terrible design. A single warning would be
  good; repeatedly cutting into my music when I have many hours of capacity
  remaining essentially makes the headphones unusable for that portion of their
  battery life, effectively reducing the headphones' usable battery life
  quite a bit. The Bose has a physical switch that has to be turned on and
  off; the Sennheiser turns on and off when you rotate the earcups.
- **Weight**. This may be the only area where the Sennheiser wins. It's slightly
  lighter, perhaps an ounce lighter.
- **Size and Carrying Case**. The Bose folds up more easily and simply, into a
  carrying case that is smaller and much better designed. The Sennheiser is
  confusing to fold and I have to check every time; and the carrying case is
  less protective, and has zippers that constantly get pushed into the hinge
  where I can't reach them.
- **Comfort**. Comfort is subjective and may vary based on the shape and size of
  your head and ears, but for me, the Bose is the winner. The earcups surround
  my ears very closely without touching them; there is no pressure on my ears.
  Anything touching or bending my ears begins to hurt me after a while. The
  Sennheiser do that ever so slightly. The Bose also sit without pain on the top
  of my head where the band rests, but on a long flight the Sennheiser begins to
  ache there and I have to move the band to a different spot periodically.

### Conclusions

Buy the [Bose QuietComfort 35]({{< amz B0756CYWWD >}}).  (You're welcome.) It
has dramatically better sound, is easier to pack, more comfortable, and cancels
much more noise.
