---
url: /blog/four-core-ip/
author: Baron Schwartz
categories:
- Leadership
- Best Of
date: 2016-10-08T14:07:14-04:00
description: "A company's most valuable IP goes far beyond code and trade secrets."
image: "/media/2016/10/blueprint.png"
credit: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pocketwatch_cutaway_drawing.jpg
title: The Four Types of Core Intellectual Property
---

If you ask people what their company's core intellectual property is, my guess
is most responses would focus on technical things such as trade secrets,
recipes, source code, and algorithms. But I've come to believe this definition
doesn't encompass a company's most valuable intellectual property at all.

<!--more-->

Why does a better understanding of core IP matter? It's because a company will
work to improve what it understands to be a key driver of value and competitive
advantage. Broadening the definition of "core IP" might help align your teams
around a shared vision of what drives the most return on your investments
of time and resources.

Here are the four types of intellectual property I discuss with the team at
VividCortex.

### Technical IP

Technical IP is the type you already understand and value. It's source code,
algorithms, patents and trade secrets, recipes, manufacturing processes, and so
on. It's the "secret" stuff you think would give your competitors an advantage
if they were to possess it too.

### Sales Process and Distribution Mechanisms

The sales process and lifecycle is typically the only other type of core IP I've
seen companies recognize. Those who "get it" realize that how they get their
product into the hands of customers, and how they convince customers to buy, are
extremely valuable.  Selling is a complex and highly specialized set of
knowledge, skills, and processes that is usually specific to a particular
company and its customers.

Consider how many companies fail to continue growing as expected when they're
acquired and their go-to-market processes are integrated into the parent
company. The acquiring company often realizes, sometimes too late, that they
have destroyed the value-creation mechanism when they disrupt these processes.
It's as if they bought a pitchfork and thought they could replace the handle
with a sledgehammer handle.

An example of incredible sales IP is Splunk. Any number of entrepreneurs want to
build "the Splunk of X." Anyone who's been on the inside at Splunk just chuckles
when they hear that. Ask yourself: how, exactly, does Splunk command such high
prices for what they sell? How about Bose? Apple? Can you figure out how they do
what they do?  Can you reproduce it? No? Probably not.

If you can't figure out how another company gets customers to pay insane amounts
of money for things and be incredibly loyal, then you've
discovered the truth: sales IP is core IP.

A small number of companies realize that the way they convert their product or
service into revenue is core IP.  Ironically, some of the people who recognize
this will claim it's the most important IP a company develops. It's not.

### Recruiting, Managing, and People Ops

How does your company identify what roles are needed? How do you develop a
shared understanding of *what the company needs to do, and why, and how*, to
succeed? How do you attract candidates and
[assess](/blog/2015/10/11/personality-assessments/) their fit for the roles? How
do you interview and recruit them? How do you onboard them? How do you assess
and manage their performance, coach them, nurture them, retain them?

These processes are often the difference between companies that succeed and
those that fail. No matter how good your idea is, no matter how good the product
or sales or marketing, no matter how much the market needs to buy what you're
selling---if you don't have a high-performing team, you will fail.

![blueprint](/media/2016/10/blueprint.png)

And too many companies hire high performers but then fail them. Adrian Cockcroft
once responded to a person who said Netflix could hire people they couldn't, and
that was the difference. His remark was something along the lines of "It's not
as if you don't have great people---we found our high performers amongst your
ranks, hired them, and got out of their way." I can't find that quote, but [this
presentation](http://perfcap.blogspot.com/2011/12/how-netflix-gets-out-of-way-of.html)
contains much the same sentiment.

The processes that create a high-performance team are absolutely core IP,
because without them nothing else works. If you can't find good people to
execute your brilliant Splunk-of-X sales process, for example, it's not going to
matter how great that process is.

### Execution Processes and Culture

Once you get great people on board, you still have to ensure that the company as
a whole, as well as all of its parts, is high-functioning. How do you decide
what to work on? How do you communicate this and create alignment? How do you
manage projects? How do you eliminate waste and maximize output? How do you
scale the processes and communication as the organization grows and shifts?

These processes are often encoded in culture. A famous statement embodying this
principle is Mark Zuckerberg's motto, "move fast and break things." At
Google, LinkedIn, and others, the practice of OKRs plays a key role in execution
and alignment for high output. And there's Intel, whose former chairman Andy
Grove literally wrote the book, *High Output Management.* These are all examples
of processes and practices that create a culture of rapid, efficient execution.
These processes, and the cultural glue that binds them (and is often difficult
to distinguish from them), are solidly in the realm of core IP. Without them,
you may have great gears and bezels and springs, but you don't have a Swiss
watch movement.

### You Have To Develop Your Core IP

You can't just borrow or graft on these types of core intellectual property.
There's no magic fairy dust you can sprinkle to make it happen.

There are two major reasons for this. First, whether conscious or not, your
company already has a culture. It may be emergent and accidental, or it might
have been [intentional](/blog/intent/). But it exists. And if you just "throw
some OKRs at the problem" or "make
[diversity](/blog/2016/04/18/why-prioritize-diversity-now/) in hiring a
priority" you'll have limited success. Perhaps even rejection of the alien
tissue.

The second reason is related to the first. It's because these types of IP are
actually effects, not causes. They are artifacts of underlying meta-processes
and meta-culture that produce them. How many company founders have read the
Netflix Culture Deck and admired it? Culture decks are now commonplace, and most
of them are utter garbage. Same thing for core values. "Hmmm... I think we
should be honest, yeah. And have integrity. Those sound like [core values](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/19/opinion/enron-s-vision-and-values-thing.html)." Culture
decks and core values are the new mission statements. The mission *statement* is
irrelevant. The *mission* is what matters! You need to be intentional about your
[mission, vision, and values](https://www.vividcortex.com/about-us/careers/)---but it's the input, not the output, of that
process that is most important.

You can't just copy the outcomes of someone else's identity and become that
person. You can't just put on a purple fedora and become Prince.

As an aside, a lot of these core types of IP aren't secrets, precisely because
copying them doesn't reproduce their results.  That's why it's safe for Google
to write books about how they operate, for example. And cargo-culting Google's
practices has resulted in many a dysfunctional company.  By the way, Google's
books are part of their recruiting core IP.

By the same token, how many companies who adopt *Predictable Revenue* as their
de facto sales playbook end up with actually predictable revenue? Most of them
end up with predictable Spamhaus scores, but little else. "Appropriate Person"
anyone? Did it work for you the way [it worked for
Salesforce.com](http://www.xaprb.com/blog/2015/04/05/magic-secret-sauce/)?

Core IP looks like its own thing from the outside, but when you build it (and
build it you must), you realize it is just a manifestation of complex
interdependent systems that aren't themselves externally visible. 

Credit: [Blueprint](https://www.flickr.com/photos/wscullin/3770016707/)
