---
author: Baron Schwartz
categories:
- Life Hacking
- Leadership
date: 2016-03-27T15:04:02-04:00
description: "The HVP measures self-view and world-view and is full of surprises."
image: "media/2016/03/justice.jpg"
title: "The Hartman Values Profile Assessment"
---

A few months ago I [wrote](/blog/2015/10/11/personality-assessments/) about the
personality assessments I've been using for the last couple of years to help me
be more intentional about my team interactions and
[hiring](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/article/dance-dances-itself-using-personality-assessments-hiring-schwartz).
At the time, I was becoming fairly confident in my ability to apply the DISC and
Motivations models.  This post is about another model I use too, plus a little
more nuance about the DISC and other models.

![Justice](/media/2016/03/justice.jpg)

As Michael Gorsuch
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/michaelgorsuch/status/703998409674326016),
"healthy and effective teams are composed of individuals actively seeking to
understand each other's needs." I couldn't have said it better.  I find
personality assessments helpful in several ways, including assessing candidates
and coaching team members. They give people a concrete and consistent language
for expressing and understanding themselves and each other.

<!--more-->

### Assessments are Models

All personality assessments express a model of how humans work. Actually, many
of them are not about personalities *per se*, but it's convenient to call them
all personality assessments. The
[DISC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DISC_assessment) model, for example, is
about behaviors, which are pretty easy to observe and validate externally. It's
based on William Moulton Marston's psychological theory. There are many other
behavioral models, including Myers-Briggs.

I believe DISC is the most accurate and valid of the behavioral models I've
studied.  There are many ways in which an assessment can go wrong, but the most
obvious is if the model doesn't match reality accurately. The model is a
simplification.  There are far more than four types of behaviors, but the DISC
model implies that, in some sense, four behavioral dimensions are a reasonable
[vector space basis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basis_(linear_algebra\)) for
all of the dimensions, or at least for those that matter the most. Even if the
assessment's model is good, however, it could be designed with a bad
questionnaire or other tool, or the scoring could be badly designed or weak, or
the subject could "game" the system, or the interpreter could be biased, or the
people who promote the assessment could overstate its usefulness (many do),
or...  the list goes on. In my judgment, the assessments I use are probably
90-95% predictive.  They're wrong sometimes, but mostly right. And people don't
game the systems in my experience. I've had bad results from one person who
spent too much time over-thinking the questionnaire, but that's the only case I
know of.

Some models measure motivations instead of behaviors; the one I use and am
familiar with is based on [Eduard Sprangerâ€™s model of human
motivation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eduard_Spranger). I've seen others
that include more recent work by Gordon Allport and others. Motivations aren't
externally visible, so it is harder to interpret and apply a motivational model,
and harder to be confident that it describes people accurately. Why, then, would
you use a motivations model if DISC is so easy to apply and validate?  The
reason is that motivations (sometimes called *hidden motivations*) are thought
to be the underlying reasons for the behaviors, so in a sense it's actually a
deeper model. If you believe in the model, the assessment, and the results, then
understanding someone's motivations can help you be more thoughtful about how
you hire, train, coach, and manage them. It can help you be more confident in
your expectations of how someone will behave or respond.

An example I've referred to several times is that understanding whether someone
tends to be money-motivated is pretty valuable information for hiring
salespeople. And if you confirm the assessment's results with the candidate or
employee, as I do, then you can collaborate together with them more easily to
find the right role where they can shine with less effort.

### Peeling Back One More Layer

If behaviors are superficial, and motivations are their cause, is there an
underlying cause for motivations too? It turns out that some scientists believe
there is. I'm paraphrasing very loosely, but the theory is that motivations are
outcomes of values: we care about that to which we assign a high value.

Can we then model and measure how people value things? Yes. Or maybe. Well, some
people believe we can, anyway. As far as I can tell, the topic isn't very
mainstream in psychology, so there's a small but lively debate among a handful
of [passionately interested
people](https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/beyond-good-and-evil/201402/psychological-testing-without-psychological-tests).

I've been using a values assessment for a while. It's *much* harder to interpret
than behaviors or motivators, so I actually decided to put it aside for a while
until I felt ready to approach it again. The one I use is based on a
mathematical theory called [Axiology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiology),
and particularly upon Robert S. Hartman's work in developing a [mathematical
science of human values](https://books.google.com/books?id=EK7LBQAAQBAJ).
Although it is commercialized in various forms, the basis of them all is the
[Hartman Value
Profile](https://www.hartmaninstitute.org/about/hartman-value-profile/). 

In layman's terms, I'd describe it this way: the Hartman Value Profile and its
underlying science attempt to measure and model both how good things are (which
has a specific definition related to the description and attributes of those
things, combined with how well the attributes and descriptions correspond to the
thing), and how highly we value those things. To the extent that we value good
things highly and we devalue bad things, we have clarity about the value of
those things.  This assessment is subdivided into two parts: external and
internal. Each of these is further divided into three dimensions: systemic,
extrinsic, and intrinsic. This is difficult to explain clearly; [this
page](http://www.valueinsights.com/axiology3.html) seems to do a pretty good
job.

The assessment itself is two sets of 18 carefully constructed phrases, which the
subject ranks. The subject ranks the first set according to how good they are,
in the purest sense. They're pretty bizarre at first glance, and some of them
are pretty hard to rank for many people. It feels like comparing apples to
oranges. The second set of phrases are statements you are to rank according to
how true or false they are in your specific case. These are equally hard. When
you study the science they make more sense, but your first impression is likely
to be that they're random and unrelated to each other.

The results are also hard to interpret.  I was not able to make sense of the
assessment for a long time, so I am not going into great detail here. In my
opinion each dimension of each part of the assessment requires quite a bit of
thought. For example, one's valuation of other people is called the Empathetic
(External Intrinsic). If this is high, the subject understands other people
well. If it is low, the subject doesn't understand other people very well.

In combination with this, there is a *bias* which indicates how much the subject
over- or under-values other people. For example, one could have high clarity
about other people, but a negative bias, meaning that one understands people
well but is skeptical or hesitant about them (undervalues them).

The assessment and its results are interesting from several angles, but one of
the most compelling to me is the idea that the assessment resists manipulation.
Based on the idea that people don't knowingly behave irrationally, the theory
goes that someone who has poor clarity into the value of things will be puzzled
at how they could be incorrect in their rankings. To give a very hand-wavey
example, a psychopath who places low value upon another person's life or pain as
compared to their whims, would probably defend this choice in all sincerity.
This is wild hand-waving, of course. On the other hand, I have to ask whether
the people who designed the assessment were really the ultimate authority on the
value of things.

### Applying the Hartman Value Profile

With two parts, three dimensions, and the bias (positive, neutral, negative),
there are a lot of combinations of things to consider in this assessment! That's
why it takes so long to learn to interpret and is so subtle to apply.

Is it worth it, then?

I'd say that if I were a jury, I'd still be deliberating this. (Irony alert.)
However, I have seen it put to very good use in several cases, most notably as a
coaching tool. My coach has helped me and others use it to clarify and
understand decision-making processes and therefore get to a deeper level of
"why" about behaviors and what's likely to happen in the future.

Ultimately, the goal is to help people be [self-aware](/blog/2016/03/19/meditation/) and thus able to recognize and control their natural tendencies, instead of being controlled by them.

For example, one manual for interpretation suggests the following about one of
the score combinations, for a person who doesn't understand how systems and
processes work and doesn't think they're worthwhile:

> Systems Judgment: Low Clarity, Negative Bias
>
> This person is likely confrontational and believes he or she knows better than
> the boss, especially if a positive self direction is coupled with a high score
> sense of self.  This rebellious attitude may not be a well-informed one.
> People with this score combination may be a legend in their own minds. This is
> usually combined with a low awareness of others, which is seen in the
> empathetic outlook.

Pretty detailed indeed! And that's just the analysis of a single one of the
dimension/bias combinations.

Is it valid? I'm not sure yet. I have found
[claims](https://www.hartmaninstitute.org/resources/validation-studies/) that
there's a lot of research showing that the HVP does a very good job and is
highly accurate compared to other assessments.

For example, I've found several cases where different institutions tried to
measure which types of assessments could detect most accurately the factors that
predicted successful team members. I'm aware of several medical schools and the
like that have looked at using the HVP in admissions. One is available at [this
link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22208827) and states "The ability to
identify unique behavioral, motivational and personal talents that applicants
bring to the program that were not identifiable from the traditional application
and interview process has allowed us to determine applicants who were a good
match for the structure and culture of our program." The people who wrote this
research paper were not just bloggers.

The HVP assessment could potentially be useful to help identify traits and
judgment that people try hard to identify in interviews. For example, Mark
Roberge, CMO of Hubspot, used regression analysis to find that the top predictor
of success as a sales rep was coachability. He [wrote a blog
post](http://blog.hubspot.com/sales/how-to-interview-a-sales-rep-job-candidate-for-coachability)
about how to interview for coachability. When I read that blog post through eyes
that are familiar with the HVP assessment, it seems quite clear that the
characteristics he's looking for appear in the assessment.

*This American Life* featured the HVP in an [interesting 15-minute segment](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/231/time-to-save-the-world?act=4). It focuses more on its use as a tool for discerning good/evil than on applications to the workplace.

### Sharing Results

I always share and collaboratively edit the DISC and Motivations assessment
results, even with candidates I don't hire. People always tell me that they
enjoy the discussion and found the assessment helpful in learning more about
themselves. There are other reasons to share the results, too. It builds trust
and comfort in the interview process. Many candidates tell me they've taken
assessments but weren't allowed to see the results, and they felt judged without
the chance to know or contest the basis if it were wrong. Imagine being on trial
without hearing the charges or evidence against you! Not a good thing to do to a
candidate. And finally, my hiring style is thorough and careful, and candidates
appreciate that (or, at least, the ones I want to hire do). It's a good way to
get the relationship off on the right foot.

I don't always ask candidates to take the HVP assessment, but when I do, I don't
share the results.  I think the model is too difficult to understand. It would
be frustrating and fruitless.

If I want to pursue a point that the assessment raises, I bring it up with the
candidate, but I don't talk about the source. It is easy to point to the
Motivators or DISC; if it really represents a person's value system and
decision-making process, it'll appear there too.

### Conclusions

I'm just a beginner with this assessment and am in no way as experienced in it
or the underlying science as many others. However, at this point 
I'm impressed enough to keep studying it and learning to interpret it.

One sad note: Hartman himself, who fled to the US from persecution in Nazi
Germany after trying to subvert their evil acts, was motivated to develop the
calculus of values judgment in order to establish objective criteria for
identifying good and evil.  It's unfortunate that the most popular application
of his theory seems to be in helping businesses make money more efficiently, and
not in improving individuals or the human condition; as he
[wrote](https://www.hartmaninstitute.org/applicationsofaxiology/)

> This, then, is our extraordinary opportunity. We may go on spending our money
> to develop the hydrogen and cobalt bombs and make the scene at Melbourne come
> true and give the men from Outer Space their opportunity to write the
> six-volume report, or we may use a fraction of this money â€“ hardly more than
> the cost of some tiny gadget in an intercontinental missile â€“ to concentrate
> the energies of a dozen or so people on human survival. The choice is ours,
> and it may be final.

Food for thought.

[Photo Credit](https://www.flickr.com/photos/jmtimages/3763196437/)
